Migration from Conectiva 10 to Mandriva 2007

   Important notes related to the migration from Conectiva 10 to Mandriva 2007.

     * Backup your system!
     * How the migration works
     * Details about the migration
          + Changes in /etc/group
          + About configuration files and others
          + Read the migration log

Backup your system!

   As in any migration/installation, is highly recommended that you backup your system files before proceed the installation. See below for more details regarding the migration and how your files can be afected.

How the migration works

   In a few steps, for the impatient:

    1. the Mandriva installer detects your Conectiva 10 installation;
    2. some configuration files are fixed;
    3. it gets a list of all packages installed on your system and then discover which packages are equivalent in Mandriva;
    4. remove the old packages;
    5. install the new ones; and then
    6. proceed the normal Mandriva installation and configuration.

Details about the migration

Changes in /etc/group

   There are three new groups in Mandriva: usb, tape and nogroup. These groups are added before the installation process and care is taken if the GID of some of the groups already exists. Also, the file is sorted to ease the readability (is this really needed? may be someone won't like to see his groups scrambled with the system groups..).

About configuration files and others

   Usually, configuration files when packaged in an RPM are marked as %config(noreplace), so:

     * when installing new packages, and a given configuration file to be installed already exists, it is created with the .rpmnew suffix in the name, after that the system administrator choose which file to use;
     * when removing packages, all configuration files that have been changed are renamed to originalfilename.rpmsave.

   But binaries and other shared files usually are not marked as noreplace. So before migrate your system, check if there are any critical files that are not part of any package and can be replaced by some other package.

Read the migration log

   A lot of useful information can be found in the logs of the migration. You can check which packages were removed and installed and what has been changed on your system by the Mandriva installer.
